---
title: Substack is disrupting media publishing, but is it cancel-proof?
permanlink: /blog/substack-media-cancel-culture
---
August 21, 2020 | 7 min read | [[Blog]]


One interesting trend I’ve been following of late is the emergence of [Substack](https://substack.com/) as a hub for independent publishing. For those who don’t know, Substack is a platform that facilitates the creation and publication of email newsletters to a list of subscribers. What makes it special is the ability to leverage the built-in payments system to convert readers into a paid audience. For established writers and journalists, this reduces the dependence on large publishers whilst granting autonomy over the editorial process. For amateurs, competition is high, but no longer are tools the limiting factor for growth.

Enthusiasm for this direct creator-to-reader model has been profound. Big names have made the switch from newsroom-to-indie and found thousands of paying readers. This change is indicative of evolving digital consumption habits and, by extension, how the media landscape is morphing to fit those demands. Traditional media, long since stripped of their monopoly over news and information, increasingly face fundamental questions of purpose, legitimacy, and who __exactly__ they are for?

Across the democratic world the answer has been to double-down on contentious political coverage. By intensifying the issue-attention cycle—how the public gains and loses interest in a particular issue over time—mass media has consolidated their role as purveyors of alarmist partisan bias. The relentless stream of confected scandals and political theatre contributing to an embattled and existential public psyche, all for profit. The capacity of media gatekeepers such as NewsCorp or The New York Times to bridge societal divides has waned, their will to do so diminished even further.

This crisis of legitimacy facing media institutions has no obvious point of conclusion. How can trust be built in societies that no longer agree upon basic facts, principles, or __sources__? Until the recent past most people tuned into the same TV, radio, and news broadcasts at the same time. __Prime Time__ was so-called for a reason and it facilitated an illusion of commonality, of collective awareness and shared culture between disparate people.  Now, in an increasingly __fragmented__ world of paywalled information, closed Facebook Groups, and encrypted Telegram Channels; is there any shared cultural touchpoint that can bind and unite a society of individuals?

The choice of __fragmented__ to describe this trend is an intentional one. For it offers insight how we got to this point. Around the 1980s, media elites and cable network honchos began to engage in ”audience fragmentation”, the division of consumers into neat categories of shared interests. By segmenting this way, programming could be produced __specifically__ for certain groups and, of course, so would the advertising. The question is whether the networks were catering for existing fragments of the audience, or if they were doing the fragmenting themselves.

We now know the answer to be both. The ultimate effect could be the emergence of a new informational universe, populated bay disparate echo-chambers, hyper-focused upon niche interests, and encased not by a vacuum; but by the dark energy of social media, inviolably distorting all that comes into its orbit. That’s an admittedly reductive view of the future, but if a lack of trust and legitimacy is the diagnosis, the shift away from shared media is unlikely to be the tonic.

Another catalyst for the shift is the growing rejection of ad-supported media. [Antonio Garcia Martinez](https://twitter.com/antoniogm/status/1284889341265768449), a former Facebook ad-guy responsible for building their monetisation efforts, believes the move towards indie-subscriptions “…__counter-intuitively, will increase social and political polarisation and create mutually unintelligible and hostile polities. In retrospect, we’ll see that ads were a much safer business model.__” In many respects, this prediction has been borne out already.

The internet has provided the tools required for groups of people organised around a shared ideal or interest — "vital communities" as media analyst Martin Gurri has coined them — operating in distinct "spheres of truth" outside of the mainstream. Such groups deploy esoteric language to communicate their values and ideas, often with little regard for broad accessibility. As a test, see if you can define “__simp__”, “__stan__”, “__cis__”, “__TERF__”, or “__tankie”;__ and to __who__ such terms are relevant.

Martinez is no objective observer. Ads are in his blood. However, the return of ad-supported models could be precipitated by subscription fatigue as people accrue a growing number of payments. Paying multiple writers $5-10 per-month may be untenable as the market becomes saturated. Informal Substack bundles have begun to emerge in response to this problem, but at what point does such coalescence merely result in the reinvention of newspapers/magazines? Perhaps by reinventing the wheel, the media can reestablish its core principles and reclaim an authoritative reputation.

Many see other benefits to the distributed model for digital publishing, namely as a bulwark against the creep of cancel-culture and censorship. If a writer has built a paying readership in the the thousands, cancellation becomes a much more difficult task—to whom does one complain? As the technologist [Paul Graham](https://twitter.com/paulg/status/1284767234116780032?s=20) has noted, “__People will hate-read things, but they won’t hate-pay-for them.__” It’s true, perhaps the most effective defence against mob interference is to price them out of the debate. But do we really wish the future of the internet to result in silos of information that are immune from external critique?

As for whether Substack is actually cancel-proof, as [David Brooks](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/23/opinion/substack-newsletters-writers.html) suggested a few weeks ago, there is cause for optimism. The company has pledged a program of financial support for writers facing legal challenges to their work. Patreon, a competing creator-to-consumer platform, has engaged in censoring accounts, but it remains unclear if Substack has faced similar pressures. Given the ascendent Puritanism of our day, it seems inevitable this question will be answered sooner rather than later.
